title: Updated
date: 2012-06-12

# Towards a New Intellectual   

### A Shared Dilemma

>> I'm not what I seem.   
>> But that's okay.   
>> Artists thrive on contradictions.   
   
>> Marvin Gaye

Occasionally, the results of mistakes are much more interesting than those of hard work. Marvin Gaye’s hallmark album *What’s Going On* (1971) serves as one of those miraculous examples of serendipity. During the mixing sessions of the title song and first single in 1970, a rather fortunate accident occurred. When the artist asked his sound engineer Ken Sands to play two alternate takes of the main vocals, the technician unwittingly played both tracks simultaneously. The unintended result was a duet between the singer and himself. Gaye liked this side-effect to such an extent that he not only decided to keep it, but even pushed this mistake to the extremes. Not content with mere duplication, the artist multiplied his voice several times on the final mix of the album. The harmonic, multilayered vocals became this record’s most recognizable feature.

By the time of the recording of his next solo album, *Let’s Get it On* (1973), Gaye had mastered this technique of overdubbing to perfection. In fact, he used it so frequently that his ‘old-school’ producer, Ed Townsend, even openly wondered if the singer was still capable of singing an entire song in one take. Nonetheless, it was precisely this extensive use of multitrack recording that turned his multilayered vocals into more than just a stylistic novelty. On this album, the singer capitalized on the immanent possibilities of the technical medium to play out the doubts, discussions and arguments that he had with himself. As a result, *Let’s Get it On* released the dissonant voices from the isolated existence in Marvin Gaye’s head and harmonized them on the multiple tracks of the recording.

Nevertheless, the album was more than just a therapeutic exercise of a troubled artist. In my opinion, the accidental duplication and intentional multiplication of Gaye’s voice are not harmless but have enormous philosophical, psychological and practical ramifications. Multitrack recording irreversibly cut the person Marvin Gaye up into a wide range of alter egos. The contradicting voices that were captured on *Let’s Get it On* can impossibly be reunited into a single, coherent one. They are autonomous personae rather than different aspects of a schizophrenic personality. 

Multitrack technology accidently rendered the unified subject obsolete. The resulting effect of polyphony, however, has often been accused of being of mere esthetic interest. According to this line of criticism, the multiple voices of Marvin Gaye’s records and other works of art are purely fictitious, not part of any concrete discursive practices and can therefore impossibly initiate any social and cultural transformations. In this presentation, I will argue that it is exactly the other way around. Personae rather than individuals are the genuine subjects of discourse. Any person is part of multiple, diverse practices and is therefore incapable of fully identifying with the role that any particular one of them forces on him. Correspondingly, I suggest a re-conceptualization of the post-human subject as an arena in which the confrontation between different roles takes place. The new intellectual proposed here, is an example of such a battle field.

## The Dilemma of the Black Intellectual

In his essay ‘The Dilemma of the Black Intellectual’ (1985) Cornel West vocalizes the unique predicament of the title’s protagonist: 

> “Caught between an insolent American society and insouciant black community, the Afro-American who takes seriously the life of the mind inhabits an isolated and insulated world.” 

Although it is quite easy to misinterpret this quote as such, West actually refuses to define the subject of his dilemma in essentialist terms. The importance of the black intellectual neither consists in his skin complexion nor his ethnic lineage but in the ongoing tension between the contradictory roles that are imposed on him. Cornel West situates this specific individual in the struggle between the American society and the black community.

Instead of repeating the exact details of West’s analysis of the black intellectual’s predicament, I will here focus on the text’s implicit but crucial, theoretical contribution to discourse analysis. ‘The Dilemma of the Black Intellectual’ subtly shows that a subject first emerges when an individual finds himself caught between at least two practices. As long as an analysis is limited to a single discourse, one can only speak of a subject position or a persona. Subjects, on the other hand, emerge in the confrontations between multiple practices; they are borderline figures by definition.

It is precisely such a clash of discourses that gives rise to West’s so-called dilemma of the black intellectual. The singularity of this situated individual consists in the fact that the white society and the black community both try to impose a particular role on him. In the specific case of West’s protagonist, the former practice pushes the intellectual to adapt to its *“bourgeois model of academic legitimation and placement”*, whereas the latter only seems to value his ‘life of the mind’ when it comes in the form of a performance or a sermon. Although West claims that the black community does not have an intellectual tradition in the academic sense, he nevertheless recognizes 

> “…two organic intellectual traditions in African-American life: the black Christian tradition of preaching and the black musical tradition of performance.” 

West, however, neglects to further distuingish between these two intellectual traditions and treats them as identical. In my opinion, he thereby misses a chance to fully capitalize on the opportunities that his method offers, because he does not take the situatedness of his protagonist seriously enough.

West’s juxtaposition of two practices implies that in order to be acknowledged by both practices the aspiring intellectual has to play the role of The Scholar and The Performer at the same time. Both the white academy as well as the black community try to impose a specific set of norms, rules and expectations on the black intellectual. In other words, these discursive practices force him to act out contradictory roles. It is of crucial importance to notice that the black intellectual can never fully identify with neither The Scholar nor The Performer. What constitutes the protagonist of Cornell West’s dilemma is the struggle between two discursive practices rather than a fixed identity. Instead of lamenting the loss of a coherent subject, however, he values the transformative possibilities that this split personality offers.

## Biography  

In his obituary for the legendary soul singer, West describes Marvin Gaye as an excellent example of his black intellectual. Nonetheless, his appreciation of the artist’s intellectual and social achievements is limited to *What’s Going On*. West describes the importance of the album as follows: 

> “This groundbreaking album was not only the first conceived and enacted by the artist (as opposed to studio staffers), but also the first concept album that hung together by means of a set of themes – themes concerned with socio-economic critique and Christian outlook.” 

To him, the relevance of *What’s Going On* consisted in the fact that Marvin Gaye exploited his gift as a performer to communicate his Christian message of love, peace and harmony. Because his status as a superstar gave him credibility to both a mainstream and a R&B audience, the artist was capable of influencing both the American society as well as the black community with his sermon.

Unfortunately, Cornel West neglects to incorporate some crucial biographical facts about Marvin Gaye in his analysis of *What’s Going On*. These omitted details add up to a more complex portrait of the artist/intellectual. They reveal the tension between the glamorous life of the performer and the moral ways of the priest. West ignores, for instance, that the singer was already heavily drug addicted during the recording of What’s Going On. Nor does he mention that Marvin and his first wife Anna Gordy had extramarital affairs on a regular basis. Above all, however, West completely ignores Gaye’s continuous fight with his father who was a preacher in the House of God church. All these fact inevitably suggest that Christianity, and the expectations and values that it preaches, were a problem as much as a solution to the singer. 

Whereas these personal struggles only appeared in the background on *What’s Going On*, they are foregrounded on *Let’s Get it On*. The latter album documents Gaye’s difficulties to combine spirituality and sexuality. Although the message of the album is as explicit as that of *What’s Going On*, the singer now not just preaches his sermon but also allows us to see his personal doubts, sins and temptations. This shift is literally reflected in the strange recording history of the album’s title song. At first – and I will play a clip of this now – the song tries to recreate the formula of *What’s Going On*. As you can hear, this song initially had a purely political meaning. *“Understanding and brotherhood”* Marvin sings *“Everybody ought to try and do some good”*. Gaye once again tried to convince the world of the need for love, peace and harmony. After meeting his future second wife – seventeen year old Janis Hunter – during the recording session, however, the song instantaneously acquired an extra layer (another clip). Superficially, explicit sexuality now appears to be the message of ‘Let’s Get it On’ and it is for this exact reason that Cornel West refuses to acknowledge its intellectual value. Closer inspection, however, reveals that it is actually the tension between the spirituality, and sensuality that is the main motive of Gaye’s later works.

What this example shows is the fact that for real, situated individuals such as Marvin Gaye – rather than the abstraction that The Black Intellectual actually is – the Christian and the performative African-American tradition are not as homogenous as West seems to suggest. They are two separate discursive practices, each with their own norms and standards. For this reason, it does not suffice to situate the subject between two conflicting personae. It is necessary to multiply and complicate these roles even further. Multitrack recording gave Marvin Gaye the opportunity to literally do this. On *Let’s Get it On* the conflicting voices that stem from discursive tensions become apparent and even sound harmonized. The technology proved to be capable of bringing together oppositions that the subject Marvin Gaye failed to reconcile.

As argued above, the value of Cornel West’s essay consists in the fact that he does not situate the intellectual as part of any particular discourse but in the struggle between two discursive practices. However, *Let’s Get It On* teaches us that his oversimplified juxtaposition of American society and black community simply reinscribes the traditional dichotomy between mind and body – or knowledge and experience – on a discursive level. As a result, everything that is not academic is homogenized under the title performance. Situating the black intellectual between more, and more specific practices, could create a way out of thinking in terms of such dualities. 

## Conclusion  

Whereas Cornel West describes his dualist model for future intellectuals, Marvin Gaye performs his pluralist alternative. The artist was the arena for multiple, not just two, conflicting discursive practices. Nonetheless, as his albums prove, human beings are not the exclusive site of these confrontations. Every other medial expression can fulfill the same function and sometimes they are up to the task even better. In fact, I would claim that is actually the technical medium that allows us to view the human subject differently. 

One could even argue, that Marvin Gaye’s records accomplishes things that he could no longer achieve as a person. The success of records like *What’s Going On* and *Let’s Get it On* actually consists in the fact that they reconcile different personae and could thereby function as a non-utopian horizon for personal and social change. In fact, these albums harmonized the dissonant voices and their corresponding discursive practices that the singer would continue to struggle with the rest of his life. I would argue – and this is also my starting point for further discussion – this eventually leads up to the conclusion that a human subject has no prioritized status over other medial expressions. Each record, each movie, each book and each picture can be conceived as a space where different personae are confronted with one another and can therefore function as actors of social transformation.